HW 4: Due 11:59PM December 1

**There will be no reviews for this Homework**

Feel free to give answers collectively, and also if you want to, you can call 
out something specific to yourself different from your pair.

(a) What languages did you use in this course? 

    In total, we used Java, Ruby, Scala, Clojure, Haskell, Kotlin, Groovy, and
    Python. We used Java, Ruby, and Scala for Assignment 1, Clojure, Haskell, and
    Kotlin for Assignment 2, Groovy and Kotlin for Assignment 3, and Haskell and
    Python for Assignment 4.

(b) Which one of those you used for the first time?

    For me (Diego), it was my first time using Ruby, Scala, Clojure, Haskell,
    Kotlin, Groovy and even Python.



    The languages I used for the first time were:
        Ruby, Scala, Clojure, Haskell, Kotlin, Groovy and Python

        - Luis
        

(c) What are your impressions about all the languages that you used (compare
and contrast in your view)?

    I (Diego) found the similarities among the functional languages fascinating,
    although they work in different ways. The thought process for implementing a
    functional solution may be somewhat uniform among the individual functional
    languages but they all have very different tools and quirks for achieving the
    goal. Also, I was surprised at the number of languages that use the JVM, I did
    not expect to see such familiar syntax so often.



    Upon writing this response I realized how, although many languages are very
    different in terms of syntax and implementation strategies, they all revolve
    around the same principles in terms of usage. Many share a lot of similar
    aspects in terms of iterators and data structures. I found myself always
    looking for elements that I was familiar with and always found them which
    makes sense when you think about how they are taught to us without the
    context of a specific language.

        - Luis
    

(d) What did you learn mostly in this course (I'm interested in hearing
your views, things you realized, things you found interesting, things
you did not like so much about any particular language, etc.)?

    I (Diego) still find coming up with immutable, functional solutions to be a
    difficult puzzle. I am not sure if it will become the standard some day but that
    world would be very different. The course was extremely interesting and a
    fantastic opportunity to dip a little into all sorts of new languages and
    totally different paradigms of programming, and I found appreciation for
    languages like Ruby and Python with their nice, clean syntax and conventions. To
    me, having a couple short lines to solve the problem using functional style was
    enjoyable overall but still hard. In particular, I struggled to make sense of
    Clojure, perhaps because of all the parentheses. I feel as though I learned the
    basics of the functional paradigm, but more importantly, how to think in
    different languages to solve problems.

        

    Languages aren't perfect and I have learned this and internalized it now
    more than ever. Some are better at certain things than others and that's
    perfectly fine. Static vs Dynamic, strict vs not, Imperative vs Functional,
    all of these have their own place in development.

    I now have a respect to functional languages since they implement things
    completely different from what developers are used to from conventional
    imperative languages. I have struggled the most with Haskell but it has
    become my favorite language to butt heads with. I enjoy struggling now and
    learning!
    
    Thanks Venkat!

        - Luis

Total[10]: 10